Okay, what are the good parts of House Bill 72?
Well, we've hit on a number of them. The increase in
teacher salaries was essential. I mean, the
salary before the bill was $11,100, and 70% of the
districts we had ever studied showed that 70% of
the districts 40 years ago did not add more than 10%
to that base.
Well, in terms of attracting and keeping big
people, it was not competitive. The 15-2 isn't
really competitive yet. I mean, with the bonuses
in the career ladder, it could be, but those are
going to have to be increased because if you
compare the salaries of people who have graduated
from Texas A&M with a four-year degree, right, in
other fields such as business and engineering and
these other fields, the 15-2 isn't competitive.
You're going to have to go beyond that. I'd like to
see us move more toward a career ladder with a
12-month employment for some teachers where they
can work with tutoring programs in the summer,
special programs for the gifted, like the program
they have up in Garland. They have a program called
Academic Coaches where they work in the summer.
And instead of just having them coach, like the
coaches are hired to coach the football in the
summer, these people are hired to coach kids who
are gifted kids or kids with special problems, and
move toward a system where we have third and fourth
level career ladder teachers on a 10-month
assignment, a 12-month assignment. Not
necessarily teaching in regular class, but
running training programs for other teachers in
the summer, setting up programs where you can have
the beginning teachers of the previous year come
back in that summer for extra help from moving into
the second year, not treat the beginners as if
they're experienced people, Every other
profession has an induction program for
beginning teachers. And they have a mentor
working with them through their first year of
teaching. And then they work with them in their
second year. And those are the kinds of things that
I think are going to be essential. So the salary
thing and the structure for career ladders, if we
can work it out, would be one of the best things to
ever happen. The scholarship programs have to be
expanded. The research and development
component that's in there, the uses of the new
technology. See, part of the solution to the
teacher shortage is not to try to keep doing what
we're doing. It's to use the talent you've got
better in a differentiating way. And have some of
the models, like talk to us. We have the master
teacher, the two regular teachers, and two
interns. Take 100 students. And you match your
five people, one with a math background, one with a
science background, one with an English
background, one with a social studies
background, and a backup person to work with the
computers and the technology, working as a team
with those 100 students. And then you utilize the
talents of the people in different ways with those
100 students. Instead of organizing the school
around each 50-minute period, we've done 50
minutes of math, 50 minutes of media, 50 minutes in
science, 50 minutes in the gym, 50 minutes in
foreign language. I mean, it's boring. Just more
of that isn't going to improve the schools. It may
just compound the boredom. You've got to think
about having sometimes when students work in
independent study activities with
instructional programs and computers,
sometimes when they're in small groups,
sometimes when they're in large groups. And then
instead of having this outstanding physics
teacher teaching five periods a day, you might use
that person to teach three periods and then have
the students work in independent study areas two
days a week with the interns. And use that teacher,
that outstanding teacher, much more wisely.
That's the only way we're going to solve the
shortage. Now, the programs in terms of smaller
class sizes, I think they're terrific. I think
that Texas could really be a leader in the nation if
they implemented that. I'm worried about that
because a lot of it seems to be pulling back from
that. I think the programs for four-year-olds,
especially in disadvantaged areas where you have
to have a lot of mothers and fathers, both parents
working, We discovered that 28% of the kids in the
school are coming single-parent homes. 69% come
from homes where both parents work. So if you could
have a program where each of these four-year-olds
would get some help in starting off on the right
foot, regardless of their background, if you
could help those kids stop of learning, reading,
writing, and spelling in those first three days.
That, I think, is one of the major aspects of this
bill. The payoff, unless you pay not be able to see
until 12, 15 years from now, it's only important to
stick with those requirements. There are a lot of
other good aspects of the bill. I think the
requirement in terms of the accreditation where
they would be evaluating these school districts
and holding them to these standards, if they can
set that up. And I would hope they would look when
they go into these school districts to make sure
they're not hiring unqualified teachers. One of
the real scandals in this state and states around
the country is the number of people that are hiring
on emergency permits. Just putting a warm body in a
class to hold the class. There are 5,892 emergency
permits given in Texas two years ago. I don't have
last year's data. I'm sure it's gone up. And then
there's a lot of school districts that are
allowing teachers to teach out of their field if
they've been prepared. With the math shortage,
some districts have taken the elementary
teachers who've had some courses in math and
making them secondary education math teachers.
Well, that's not right. That's not going to
improve. See, the requirement now that there be
another year of math for every high school student
will just be a hoax perpetuated in the public by the
legislature if we can't get more and better math
teachers. We've got a state where over half the
teachers who were hired two years ago to teach math
were unqualified teachers. Now requiring
another year of math for every high school
student, which will triple the need for math
teachers at a time when only half the people
teaching math are unqualified to teach it. So you
don't just improve quality by making regulations
or laws. It takes an incentive system to get
competitive salaries to get these outstanding
math students to go into teaching rather than
going to work for IBM. And they're not going to be
attracted to teaching unless you give them good
salaries and the conditions in the workplace
where they can feel like they're making a major
contribution. I personally believe that there
are a lot of outstanding people out there who would
like to get into teaching if we can make it an
exciting work setting. We've got a situation here
at A&M where we have 264 majors in Mathematics
Education and 329 in Science Education. We
prepare more math and science people than any
university in the nation. But if these people and
not get good salaries and good support as teacher
scholars who are treated as people who are
responsible for the intellectual development of
children, not babysitters or policemen in study
halls, they're going to leave teaching. Unless
you can improve the condition of the workplace and
improve the reward system. Now they will stick
with it because you've got to love kids and love
teachers in order to sustain a profession, you
know, stay in the profession. But you can't expect
people to stay in a profession where they can't
make enough money to send their own kids out to
college, where they spend their whole life
preparing other people's kids for college. And so
these are some of the things in the bill that are yet
to be implemented that I think should make a real
difference. Governor Mark White is planning to
have Texas colleges universities reform what are
necessary reforms for higher education we got
another do we have another couple of hours you know
all of the
there's a new book out
by Ernest Boyer
on
policy issues
in higher education. Anyway, what he does, he
talks about the five contradictions in higher
education. You've got a situation where the
professors These are five
areas
we have
to deal with. The first area is we've got to get the
expectations of the professors tuned in with the
students that they're teaching. It's very hard to
get professors to focus on students and what the
students do. And when they do, they never satisfy
those students. better
students.
They want the high achievers in high SAT scores.
And there's a lot of blame placed as students come
to the colleges unprepared and that kind of thing.
So one of the real problems is we have to get the
professors committed to teaching the students
that they end up with. And if it's a community
college, we don't expect students to have
the abilities
that
the people that hire them have. And what I think we
need more than anything else right now is a student
orientation of the product and the commitment to
that as a major mission of the university. And
research is important. But the
primary
mission
of the university is to educate the students . And
that has to be put back and forth. The other area,
another area, is the curriculum itself. The whole
issue of how much career and vocational
preparation and how much general education. It
was the same issue as the select committee talked
about. What's the place of vocational education
and seminary education? If you extend that, to
higher
education. How much of it should be career
oriented to a career? And there are a lot of debates
now that the best preparation for most careers
should probably be a good liberal education for
people. It should be a good core curriculum for
everybody. The engineers who go through four
years of preparation without any humanities
courses are not prepared, either for engineering
or for the world. And I
think you can
make a case for that myself. But that's for the day.
We need to define what the core curriculum should
be in 1985 to prepare people for living out their
lives in the 20th century. And we need to be clear on
how much time is needed in the curriculum to be
devoted to that. And
now it's
just a matter of saying everybody ought to take two
courses of math, two courses of history, two
courses of English, two courses of a foreign
language, and then quote, then literally educate
them. I think a lot of it has to do with how it's
taught also. If you're just in a class being taught
by a graduate assistant and 200 students, you
know, you're not learning too much about inquiry.
If you're just sitting there listening to his
lecture, he doesn't even want to be there. He's
just making his graduate assistantship money.
You
know,
we really need to get some of these full professors
started to teach all these other courses again.
Like how to make a real commitment to teach the main
curriculum, et cetera. The whole area of student
affairs in higher education is similar, isn't it?
What is the role of student affairs in a
university? Now here we have over 500 books. I
think
this would be a completely different place
without the student affairs program. It has a
major impact on intellectual refinement, as well
as the social environment of people of every age
that people are acting like. I talked to Susan
Ellis one time about this, and she said, He told me
that the thing that made
the most difference in his life when he was at A&M
was the way he encouraged the government. He got
interested in international relations. He got
interested in politics. He got interested in
managing the business. He went to hire the
business. But it was an out-of-class activity in
the environment of student involvement in this
kind of thing. It gave him that. But we
need to look at these kinds of things in addition to
looking at the curriculum. There's going to be a
lot of interest from the private government and
the state on how you can use education as an
instrument for economic development and how you
can use it to teach people to be ready for the
technological age. Texas
economy
is dependent on oil. The government's duty in
terms of the mind of the Texas student is the new
oil. The new oil of Texas. And that's going to solve
the state's problems with the economy. Well,
another area is to get Texas beyond itself. to
the international activities. Right now, we're
all neighbors, and then something happens in
Ireland and Italy and, you know, some down in
Mexico and other stuff. We're all part of it. So
you've got to start acting like we're citizens of
the world. you
know,
as soon as there's
a call at a station and get out of our current, you
know, our attitudes about who we are and where we
want to relate to individually. And every, and
this shouldn't just be for colleges, students
ought to be getting this in the schools. There
ought to be a global approach to study in all of the
schools in this state. We've
got a long way to go in that, I think, in terms of the
kind of education that we provide. This
out-of-state student increase in tuition and
things like that can be without a lack of
sensitivity in some respects to the need. The
value for Texas students in having an
international student body that
we
shouldn't be saying, let's take them and help them
out. We should be saying, let's take them because
they're essential to having a world, a university
that's world-oriented. They add as much to our
environment as we give to them. And that attitude,
I think, is going to have to be looked at,
particularly looking beyond Texas
and what they want this particular year, but this
university should become. Those are just a few of
the things. I think we need to take a look at
articulation between the high schools, the
community colleges, and the university. Much
closer working together. I think we need to take a
look at the collaboration and cooperation within
systems and a cross-system in the state, I think we
could do
much more within our own system as we work between
Prairie View and this campus. And it's only 45
minutes away. We ought to be having a lot more
exchange programs between students, a lot more
exchange programs between faculty. We're even on
different calendars. We're not even on the same
calendar. And then when we try to do exchanges,
you know, swap faculty. Well, if a person goes down
there and teaches, he has a different calendar for
the course he's teaching than we have here. So it
makes it very hard. If we were just on the same
calendar, we could swap easily. I mean, instead of
a person teaching the sociology course down at
Fairview, and we could teach it up here. Same
course, same, you know, level. just swap and teach
one place
or another each semester. We could do a lot more of
that. We could enhance the environment of both
campuses. But we don't. We're only 45 minutes
away. We can go to Europe and London and have
comparative education programs in London. We
have programs only in Japan. But it seems to be
harder to go down here in a prairie 45 minutes a
week. I bet more faculty members have been to
foreign countries than have been down to Paris.
Okay. What are the advantages and disadvantages
of reforming higher education? I don't think
there are any disadvantages. I think that there
are many aspects of almost any organization to
make it better.
And I don't know of any organization that couldn't
be better. The key is to decide what needs changing
and to make sure that change is better than what
existed. There's a wonderful saying that I've
learned since I've been here in Texas. Don't fix it
until it's broke. There are enough things that are
broke to be changed. that we can work on without
following up the things that are going well. And it
takes some analysis to make sure that we need to
spend that time on what needs changing and what's
possible to change. You shouldn't spend a whole
lot of time on things that can't be changed. But
things that can be changed and ought to be changed,
we ought to be working on. And I think that that will
take you know, some real study. And we ought to set
up some evaluation process to make sure we get
feedback on whether we're achieving what we set
out to achieve. And that has to be built into the
initial plan as we go about doing it. And like any
kind of reform, you know, change, we can move
either backwards or forwards with a change. all
changes
didn't necessarily bring improvement.
So we have to say that we're going to set up and
accomplish something and set up a system to
evaluate how does the quality of Texas public
education compare with other states? Texas has
some speculative problems. And one of the worst
things we do, and the state and the federal
government recently did this, is to take these SAT
scores in one state and compare them with another.
The first thing that's wrong with that, if you look
at this first, is that In some states, only 5% or 6%
of the students take the test.
But in Texas, 32% of the students take the test. 69%
in Connecticut take it.
3% in North Dakota. So that kind of data doesn't
mean anything. So when we do comparisons, we have
to be careful. But what we need to do is look at,
instead of saying, how does it compare, we ought to
be saying, how well are we doing in improving what
exists in Texas? Now, Texas has a situation where
37% of the students in the school are from Hispanic
backgrounds. Texas and California. California
would probably be the first state where what was
the minority would become the majority. Texas
would probably be second. So we have a special
problem in having a number of children that speak
English as a second language. We need to say, how
are we doing at solving that problem so all of these
kids can have equal access to educational
opportunity in the state as it moves, where this
population that it has is going to be able to meet
the needs of the year 2000. Everybody has a piece of
the action here to deal with this problem.
Education is not something that just schools
should be concerned about. This study that I just
finished working on with the Committee for
Economic Development, Investing in Our
Children, business in the school. Industry and
business have a role to play in this, and the higher
ed institutions have a role to play in improving
the public education. So instead of spending our
time saying, how do we compare with somebody else
using these crazy tests, which we don't have the
same populations we're comparing We should be
systematically identifying what it is we're
trying to achieve, and then ask ourselves, how
well are we doing in it? And I believe that if you
look at the effort that Texas is making as a
criterion for how we're doing,
we could get A's for that. I've never been in a state
where there's more commitment to doing something
about improving education. Now, beating up on
each other about how bad things are won't do it. I
mean, that's a waste of energy. We need to say, what
are we doing well? And there are a lot of things
we're doing well. You know, I think the
Barling-Williams programs in Texas are models
for the rest of the nation. We ought to be very proud
of them. And we can show you and show in certain
districts where there have been tremendous
strides made. There are outstanding schools in
the state that could be used as lighthouse
schools. If you look at the kind of programs in
Houston School District in terms of the magnet
schools, Dallas has some outstanding programs
going on there. There are school districts and
rural schools all over the state that have some
exciting things going on. We want to use those as
lighthouses and share the best practices that are
going on. And the universities can help with that.
We started a principal center in which we brought
together a congress of principals, outstanding
principals from all over the state. We had 58 of
them here last summer in what we call the
Principal's Academy. So we took House Bill 72 and
said, how are we doing in implementing the
Declaration of Independence? Where are the
problems now? You know, performance appraisal
was one. How do we do good performance appraisal?
We actually set up some practices when we did that.
We brought in resource people to help with this.
The career ladder, we looked at that. We brought in
people who were the principals of the schools that
Sarah Lightfoot wrote about in her study of high
school. The study showed some of the outstanding
high schools in the country who brought the
principals of some of those schools in. We need to
do more of that. We need to share with each other
what's the best ways to improve the quality of
education. in the schools. Principals Academy,
we can do, we set up nine clusters now around the
state. We're also tied in with other universities
in those regions to help with those principals, 58
principals who attend the academy. Those
principals will come back in November for a
follow-up meeting and come back next summer for
another full week in the academy. So we'll begin to
have a network of practicing professionals who
can, in fact, be a part of a network for
implementing good practices. And they're all
connected now with a hotline where we share
information daily across these groups. So
there's a lot of good things going on in Texas.
There's a lot of interest on the part of the
technology people who work with the state.
They're just setting up interactive TV programs.
They even pipe programs into schools with a small
roast because we only had a small group of students
at an advanced level studying certain kinds of
things. You can connect several different
schools. You can make up a class. And you can do this
over interactive TV. Or if they don't have a
chemistry professor or a biology professor, you
can pipe this in through interactive television.
Most programs are now in operation in Texas.
They're not extensively developed yet, But
they're on our way with us. And I think we ought to
highlight the good things that are going on,
because as a result of a lot of the dialogue that
took place with this black committee, the morale
of the teachers, especially, got very low,
because they interpreted the being in the focus,
they interpreted it as criticism, especially
when the Nation at Risk came out and said, you know,
our schools are in a shambles, and that we were
going to, declare war or somebody was going to come
in and try to defeat us, and they create schools
like we've got now. We're committing unilateral
disarmament by the way we set up our education
system. Well, teachers can only take so much of
that. And really, even the good teachers feel like
they're being beat on. So if we can stop beating on
the teachers and start emphasizing working
together and helping at each of these levels, I
think that effort-wise, we're doing as much or
more than almost any other state.
How does Texas rank with other states regarding
public education? Well, you see, I think you can't
answer that question unless you take a specific
area. And the worst thing to do is to take SAT tests
and do comparisons like the federal government
did, because as I mentioned before, you know, only
3% of the kids in North Dakota even take the test.
32% in Texas take it. So comparing that data
doesn't give you anything. You know, what you
really need to do is take an area, like with career
ladders, there are nine states in the country that
are experimenting with career ladders. We're one
of them. Now, whether that makes us better than the
other 41 states, they're not doing anything on
that yet. I don't know. It all depends on whether
Clean Water ends up being better than what existed
before. And we're in a state of piloting that,
trying that. I think it will be better. I think it's
better just because we're examining new ways to
create a profession. Trying ways to keep good
teachers in the classrooms without having to
become administrators in order to make a decent
salary. That's a good goal. Now whether we can do it
or not is yet to be seen. But I'm proud to be in a state
where we're trying.
Are very many other states reforming public
education? Quite a few of them. Quite a few of them.
And they're doing it in different ways. I don't
know too many of them. Perhaps New York and
Tennessee. uh moving in in florida and maybe north
dakota i'm moving in in a very comprehensive way
probably texas and there's a more
all-encompassing set of reforms than any place
else that i know of i mean what we're trying to do is
deal with all the whole thing the curriculum the
way schools are staffed the way they're evaluated
the way they're administered we're trying to do
you know the way teachers are prepared the way
they're evaluated we're
dealing with everything in this reform package
uh i can't think of any other state that has a more
comprehensive
reform package than texas it may be one of our
problems you know because we're trying to do all of
them at once And we're trying to do it in a short
period of time. It's going to take some real
sensitivity now to get, especially the teaching
profession itself, involved in having some sense
of ownership in this package, in implementing
this package. All of the surveys we've done so far
indicate that the teachers are supportive of a lot
of these reforms, like career ladders. It's just
that they have a lot of questions about the way
they're being implemented and their lack of
involvement in the design of them and the carrying
out of them. After this fact, did we get them to feel
some investment in this whole thing and change
those things? We shouldn't be afraid to change
those things that need changing because of the
fact that it was such an all-encompassing bill It
would be very natural now to go back and have to fine
tune it without destroying the major elements
of it. Do you have any personal ideas on other
possible reforms for Texas that you would like to
see implemented? Well, I'd like to see a system
where we have much more opportunity
for school districts to innovate and try
different approaches to the way schools are
organized I'd like to see a system where you have
minimal options within the public education
system, where you might have a school which is
pretty much independently oriented, where your
students do a lot of individual study and use a lot
of technology. You might have some schools
organized around more than once a SORI approach.
You might have schools, some of them, run by
industry in collaboration with the schools. You
have a lot more work in terms of outside of the
school activity and not have so much uniformity
that doesn't allow a certain amount of uniformity
in terms of goals and standards, I think you mean.
But the way those goals and standards are
implemented, that we should have a lot of
opportunity and flexibility and autonomy. to
meet those goals and standards. I think the role of
the state ought to be to set those goals and
standards, but allow maximum freedom for the
local communities in collaboration with
community resources of a variety of kinds to find
different ways of implementing these standards.
And I think that there are a lot of ways to use people
in communities and resources that we haven't
tapped yet. I think that the
way we conceive of education, we ought to be
thinking of it more in terms of from birth
throughout all of life. People of all ages need
education, and I can see us providing
opportunities where you have some community
education settings, where you have senior
citizens, preschool children, children who are
elementary and secondary, in the same
environments where you have the senior citizens
leaving for the four-year-old and using schools
as learning resource centers for anybody
and open up the way we can see them in learning
environments.
Okay. And finally, what happened to Mr. and Mrs.
Gabler? Well, I think they're still around. They
attend the meetings each year when the textbooks
are reviewed. The thing that's different now at
the textbook hearings than in the past is the
people who are supportive of those texts also
appear now. Before, it only used to be those people
who had some criticism of what was going on. But at
the hearings now, when the Gabriel speaks,
there's usually someone who will take the other
side at that same
textbook here who will, well, disagree. But I
think it's all silly. Okay.